I absolutely abhor materialism.

I used to think watches were ridiculous. In a world where time is displayed on every screen and device, spending thousands on a mechanical watch seemed completely insane.

Let's be clear from the get-go: nobody (except for a few occupations) needs a watch. Everyone knows this, just like everyone knows a Toyota Corolla will get you from point A to point B, the same as a Mercedes CLS 63 AMG.

I used to think watches were ridiculous. The entire concept seemed irrational. Why spend thousands on something that performs worse than its cheaper alternatives? After all, a \$50 quartz watch keeps better time than a \$1'500 mechanical watch; a cheap quartz watch is more accurate over a month than many expensive mechanical watches are over a single day.

But there's something different about these objects that don't belong in our time. In a world full of disposable electronics and planned obsolescence, mechanical watches stand apart. They're powered by nothing but gears and springs, built by artisans who sometimes spend an entire year working on a single piece. It's technology created not to push boundaries, but to exist as art. Just like a painting doesn't need to advance visual representation to be worthwhile.

Think of it like this: some people choose to engrave tattoos on their skin to mark significant experiences, turning their bodies into books that tell their life stories. And I respect it, but I would never do this, as I'm not confident that I will always want a permanent reminder of a temporary feeling or moment. With a watch that you wear every day, however, you get that same sense of connection to your experiences. Each glance at the dial becomes a little moment of satisfaction; it's not about impressing others, but about enjoying something that's uniquely yours.

We are not robots. Everything, including ourselves, is made of atoms. Different combinations create different materials and textures. But as humans, we attach feelings and moments to certain objects. Just as a painting can transform an apartment into a home by carrying personal significance, a watch can become a companion that marks the chapters of your life. You might buy yourself a new one when you reach a milestone, and decades later, each piece in your collection feels like an old friend (I haven't experienced this, but this is my imagination of what it will be like).

## Money Isn't Rare Anymore

The luxury watch industry has always been about status, just like how etiquette was used to distinguish the ruling class. Back in the days, the upper class would separate themselves by having specific rules about how to eat (which fork to use for which course), how to walk (proper posture and pace), and how to dress (certain colors or materials reserved for nobility). Today, "luxury" is more accessible to regular people because all they have to do is save up some money, and they can afford a \$4,000 purse.

So luxury brands needed to find a new way to make their items feel exclusive. You can't just buy a limited edition Porsche 911 GT3 RS. You have to convince them to let you buy it. You start by buying a few other models, one for your wife, one for your kid, one for yourself. A few years later, you trade in a car for a newer model. Then, you tell them you'd be interested in the limited edition model. And then maybe, just maybe, if you're lucky and they think you'd be a good ambassador to the brand, they give you the honor to spend hundreds of thousands of dollars (and 100k over MSRP due to demand) on the limited edition car.

The same goes for certain watches and handbags. You can't simply walk into a store and buy a Rolex Daytona or an Hermès Birkin, no matter how much money you have. You need a purchase history. You need to be deemed worthy. When money becomes more common, the truly wealthy need new ways to stay exclusive.



- unethical. Why do 100k watches exist in a world where millions can't afford to feed themselves.
We respect skilled artisans who spend their lives dedicated to a craft and are passionate about it. Like a watchmaker who spend 1 year working on one single watch. Yet when someone buys one for thousands of dollars, they can get critisized. 

Luxury has always been about displaying status. Back in the days, etiquette was used to distinguish the ruling class by saying how they should eat, walk and dress. ANd luxury logos act as labels of status.

Today, "luxury" is more accessable to the common folk, because all they have to do is saveup some money, and they can afford a $4000 purse.

So luxury brands needed to find a new way to make their items feel more exclusive. You cannot just buy a limited edition Porsche 911 GT3 RS. You have to convince them to let you buy it. You start by buying a few other models, one for your wife, one for your kid, one for yourself. A few years later, trade in a car for a newer model. Then, tell them you'd be interested in the limited edition model. And then maybe, just maybe, if you're lucky, and they think you'd be a good ambassador to the brand, they give you the honor to spend hundreds of thousands of dollars, and 100k over MSRP (due to demand), on the limited edition car. We value things that take time to acquire.

What matters isn't convenience, or practicality. It's the experience. Luxurious items usually require more upkeep: a perpetual calendar watch will require ... + routine servicing.
Just like a handbag made out of austrich or crocodile leather require careful cleaning. 

Today, way more people have enough money to pretend to be the "royalty". So how do the real royalty and the highest level of people distinguish themselves among the "wannabes"? lots of money and can afford luxury items. So what do the highest of the luxury brands do? It's not enough to have the money to purchase an item to get to the highest level, where the ruling class



I used to not understand car enthusiasts, wine enthusiasts, sneaker collectors, or art lovers. But now I do.

Nobody needs a watch. Everyone knows this. A watch is not a necessity. Some choose to engrave a tattoo onto their skin, marking an experience they want to remember. Their body becomes a book, telling that person’s life story. It’s an interesting concept, and I respect it, but I would never do this, as I’m not confident that I will always want a permanent reminder of a temporary feeling or moment.

With a watch that you wear every day, however, you get that same sense of connection to your experiences, but without the permanence. It’s a way to carry a piece of your journey with you, something that can change with you over time as you buy more watches. And as you grow old, you can look back at the watches you’ve owned and remember those times.

Here's another analogy for you: to me, the point of a car is to get me from point A to point B. I can do that in a Toyota Corolla. I don't need a Mercedes CLS 63 AMG to do so. But for some people, a car is more than a piece of metal on wheels. It's a chamber in which they spend hours a day, getting around the city. So might as well make it their own. Might as well make it unique to them, and have it be how they like it. Have it be an extension of oneself. Even though you need more expensive fuel, and it's less fuel efficient, the emotional aspect weighs more than the extra money you will spend on fuel.

Just like a Toyota Corolla is more reliable than a Pagani Zonda, a $50 Well, for watches, a $50 watch can actually keep better time than a $1500 watch. A quartz watch beats any mechanical watch, all day, every day. But it's not always about performance. Because we've established from the very beginning, that watches are redundant in today's world. Just like a racecar is redundant. We don't need fast cars to run away from dinosaurs. It's all just art at this point. Self expression. Your personal touch to this world.

For some, watches are a competition. They’re a symbol of status and a way to show off success. But to me, a watch is something simpler and more personal. It's not a competition with others but rather a (playful) competition with myself. I might buy myself a new watch once I reach a new milestone. 


It's about appreciating what you already have. 
Consumerism. Not chasing the next thing. Enjoy what you have. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L8iAxWfcbm8

Im not a car guy. I just need a fuel efficient car that wont breeak and is cheap to repair. Just let me pick the color.

You're in a car all day, and you can appreciate an improvement on performance, on fuel efficiency. There's a science to it.
Watches are different in that they are completely useless.
But actually, behind a car enthusiast, although a more expensive hobby to get into, is, in my opinion, way more rational than being a watch enthusiast.
But unlike a fast car whose improvement in speed or hp you can directly feel, whose leather seats you can touch, who's heated stearing wheel you can appreciate in the winter months, there is nothing like that with watches. It's just some gears, placed into some case, and they all just tell the time.

This is not a normal thing to be into. It's strange.

A watch is a representation of a life well-lived. an accessory that is also a companion. Carry with us for years. Things have no meaning. Their lifecycle lasts months, a couple of years. There is no pursuit in acquiring a normal object.

A watch doesn't make you an interesting person, but if you are an interesting person, that interesting journey can come along with you and be represented by an object.

It's art. We don't need to watches.

Individual expression. what I collect is different from what you collect. I may have a yellow-faced watch because its eye catching, and you may have a white dialed watch because it fits with your outfits.

You can also just ignore all this and wear a watch because it elevates your 
look. 

nothing logical about this.

I like what I like. You like what you like. But we are both right. There is almost no wrong answer with watches. As long as you enjoy what you wear, it doesn't matter what others think.

I've always hated politics because 

And I think, subconsciously, this is one of the reasons why I enjoy watches. ...

a cheap quartz watch are more accurate over a month than many expensive mechanical watches are over a day

everything around us is electronic.

a mechanical watch is hard to make. you need to train artisans. A digital watch made with modern semi-conductor production methods overwhelm all that human training ...easier to produce.  every few years just change the battery.

Romantic idea. they're handcrafted, more moving parts, no external power supply, just using gears and springs. hand-assembled in many instances. Its an art. Using technology to create something unnecessary. Doesnt advance science, and that's okay. Just like paintings. embodies the antithesis of what products in our modern world represent, which are chargeable and disposable objects. 

You're never right or wrong buying a watch.
It's hard to go wrong with buying a watch (you can go wrong matching it with the rest of your fit). As long as you enjoy it, it's all that matters.

There are watches for any single budget, and that's what I like about watches compared to cars.

Materialism is stupid. 
Materialism is a low iq status signifier
Dont worship materialism
However, we are not robots. We have many biases .. . And no one is perfect, and we have an idea of how the average person thinks. Sure, lots of people literally don't care about what you have on your wrist, but to most, a good looking watch, a nice outfit, .. . People will treat you differently. If the person you are talking to sees that you are financially successful, they are more likely to listen to what you have to say. Otherwise, you will have to do some talking to convince that you are worth listening to. Thousands of dollars wrapped around your wrist 

We are not robots. We subconsciously gain confidence. People will treat you differently.

To some, a watch is used to gain confidence. Or they have to spend some money to be motivated to make some more. Or they want other 

To me, a watch is an art piece. Nothing about a watch is necessary. It was useful 50 years ago, but not anymore. There is nothing rational about watches. 

I've always hated materialism and still do. If you get enjoyment from owning 20 pairs if anything, I dont get it. And watches have always been on the top of that list for me. But watches are actually cool

Companion item. Once you reach a certain milestone in life, you get another one that you like. And then in 50 years, you can look at your collection, and each watch will feel like an old friend.

 I was not a watch guy, and it seemed insane to spend that much money on a status symbol. I didn’t need to prove anything to anybody

Objects can take on emotional significance. Yes, it mostly is influenced by the branding of the company. so they induced this feeling that "if I become the CEO, then I should have a Rolex"

The value of a watch is more than the sum of its physical components.

They keep on ticking. Everything is disposable, and even built with planned obsolescence 

Everything, including ourselves, is made out of atoms. Different combinations of atoms make up different materials, and textures, and ... . But as humans we can attach certain feelings, or moments, to certain objects. For example, if you have a painting in your apartment, sure its just a painting, its not necessary for life like water or food is, but that does not mean that it has no value. You might remember the day you bought that painting, who was there with you. All the friends that came over and asked you about that painting. Or maybe that painting was a gift from a friend, and it has a particular meaning attached to it that only the two of you will understand. 

My point is that all of these things are in our heads. But that painting, although not intrinsically valuable to anyone else, make your apartment a home. Everytime you come home, and you see that painting in the corner of your peripheral, you mentally relax knowing that you are somewhere familiar and safe.


Let me just say a word on watches. Nobody needs a watch. A watch is not a necessity. A watch is like a piece of art: [explain]. A watch is like a tattoo: [explain, remember journey]. 





My grandma lives with me, in the same household. She has her own room on the second floor. She wakes up on her own, and when she is ready, calls me (or if I am not available, whoever is home) to help her come down the stairs. On the main floor, she typically lies down on the couch and watches TV (usually the same channel, which shows a game show called "Deal or No Deal", which is simple enough for her to understand). When it's time to eat, either me or my mother call her to eat (she eats 3 times a day). 