---
title: "Part 2 of Reading Naked Economics"
tags: [Books, Economics]
---

This is Part 2 of my summary of "Naked Economics: Undressing the Dismal Science". It covers only Chapter 7: Financial Markets, starting with a summary of the chapter, and then I dive into topics of interest to me.


## Chapter 7: Financial Markets

Financial products/instruments can get complicated. We have stocks and bonds, but we also have options, futures, interest rate swaps, government "strips", and credit default swaps (which played a large role in the 2008 financial crisis). No matter the complexity in finance, no matter all the jargon and frantic activity that happens on Wall Street, everything that happens always boils down to these four fundamental needs:

**1. Raising capital:** We can either borrow, or we can trade an ownership stake (and therefore a claim on future profits) in exchange for cash.  

**2. Storing, protecting, and making profitable use of excess capital:**  If you hold cash, it will get eaten away by inflation. And the world is full of prospective borrowers, all of whom are willing to pay for the privilege to access your cash. 

> There is a reason that "interest" in math formulas are not denoted with an "*i*", but with an "*r*": the "rental rate" on capital. Individuals/companies are renting out their cash to others who can make more productive use of it. 

**3. Insuring Against Risk:** We are all familiar with health, life and car insurance. They work by charging everyone a bit more than they expect to pay out, averaged over everyone. So they make a profit, those who need the money will get it, and those who don't need it at least got a peace of mind.

> Anything can be insured. For example, a French oil tanker was rammed by a suicide bomber in 2002 off the coast of Yemen, and the insurance company ended up paying $70M.

**4. Speculation:** Financial products can also be used to bet on short-term price movements. You can bet that the price of soybeans next year will be higher than they are today. While on average, over a long period, prices do go up, in the short-term, things are harder to predict. That's what sports and financial products have in common: they facilitate gambling, even if that is not their primary purpose.

Let's now dive deeper into specific topics in finance.

### Different Tools for Hedging

First of all, this is a continuation of "3. Insuring Against Risk". "Hedging" means ...

### Starbucks and Hedging



### Catastrophe Bonds

"A catastrophe bond (CAT) is a high-yield debt instrument that is designed to raise money for companies in the insurance industry in the event of a natural disaster. [...] CAT bonds have short maturity dates of between three-to-five years. The primary investors in these securities are hedge funds, pension funds, and other institutional investors." - [Investopedia](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/c/catastrophebond.asp)

