---
title: "The Most Useless Object I Own"
---

I used to not understand car enthusiasts, wine enthusiasts, sneaker collectors, or art lovers. But now I do.

Not because I enjoy these things myself, but because I got into something that is, in my opinion, more extreme than the interests listed above. I think I picked up an edge case; I've reached a boundary of interests, and so anything within the boundary is understandable now. I didn't even know this edge case existed. I didn't know it was a thing. And I certainly didn't think that it could be a thing.

# The Most Useless Object I Own

I absolutely abhor materialism.

You know how there are the five love languages? Physical touch, quality time, acts of service, words of affirmation, and receiving gifts. Well, "gifts" ranks so low for me it shouldn't even be on the list. The thought of accumulating more possessions feels like a burden. I feel like it creates an obligation to keep, display, or use the thing. I don't want to be cluttered with objects.

Introducing: the watch.

The ultimate useless object. Nobody needs a watch anymore. In our modern digital world, where time is displayed on every screen and device we own, a mechanical watch serves absolutely no practical purpose (except in very few professions).

In a world where a \$50 quartz watch keeps better time than a \$1500 mechanical one, spending thousands on a watch seems ridiculous.

But because we have already established that watches are redundant and irrational, arguing about accuracy does nothing. 

That's like arguing that a Toyota Corolla is more reliable than a Pagani Zonda. Sure, it's true, but it completely misses the point of why people are drawn to expensive cars in the first place.

Here's another way to think about it: to me, the point of a car is to get me from point A to point B. I can do that in a Corolla. I don't need a Mercedes CLS 63 AMG to do so. But for some people, a car is more than a piece of metal on wheels. It's a chamber in which they spend hours a day, getting around the city. So might as well make it their own. Might as well make it unique to them, and have it be how they like it. Even though you need more expensive fuel, and it's less fuel efficient, the emotional aspect weighs more than the extra money spent on fuel.

But unlike an expensive car whose improvement in speed or hp you can directly feel, whose leather seats you can touch, who's heated stearing wheel you can appreciate in the winter months, there is nothing like that with watches. It's just some gears, placed into some case, and they all just tell the time.

So actually, being into watches is even less rational than being into cars.



But there's something different about these objects that don't belong in our time. In a world full of disposable electronics and planned obsolescence, mechanical watches stand apart. They're powered by nothing but gears and springs, built by artisans who sometimes spend an entire year working on a single piece. It's technology created not to push boundaries, but to exist as art. Just like a painting doesn't need to advance visual representation to be worthwhile.

I like to think of it like this: some people choose to engrave tattoos on their skin to mark significant experiences, turning their bodies into books that tell their life stories. And I respect it, but I would never do this, as I'm not confident that I will always want a permanent reminder of a temporary feeling or moment. With a watch that you wear every day, however, you get that same sense of connection to your experiences. Each glance at the dial becomes a little moment of satisfaction; it's not about impressing others, but about enjoying something that's uniquely yours.

We are not robots. Everything, including ourselves, is made of atoms. Different combinations create different materials and textures. But as humans, we attach feelings and moments to certain objects. Just as a painting can transform an apartment into a home by carrying personal significance, a watch can become a companion that marks the chapters of your life. You might buy yourself a new one when you reach a milestone, and decades later, each piece in your collection feels like an old friend (I haven't experienced this, but this is my imagination of what it will be like).

## Money Isn't Rare Anymore

The luxury watch industry has always been about status, just like how etiquette was used to distinguish the ruling class. Back in the days, the upper class would separate themselves by having specific rules about how to eat (which fork to use for which course), how to walk (proper posture and pace), and how to dress (certain colors or materials reserved for nobility). Today, "luxury" is more accessible to regular people because all they have to do is save up some money, and they can afford a \$4,000 purse.

So luxury brands needed to find a new way to make their items feel exclusive. You can't just buy a limited edition Porsche 911 GT3 RS. You have to convince them to let you buy it. You start by buying a few other models, one for your wife, one for your kid, one for yourself. A few years later, you trade in a car for a newer model. Then, you tell them you'd be interested in the limited edition model. And then maybe, just maybe, if you're lucky and they think you'd be a good ambassador to the brand, they give you the honor to spend hundreds of thousands of dollars (and 100k over MSRP due to demand) on the limited edition car.

The same goes for certain watches and handbags. You can't simply walk into a store and buy a Rolex Daytona or an Hermès Birkin, no matter how much money you have. You need a purchase history. You need to be deemed worthy. When money becomes more common, the truly wealthy need new ways to stay exclusive.


What matters isn't convenience, or practicality. It's the experience. Luxurious items usually require more upkeep: a perpetual calendar watch will require ... + routine servicing.
Just like a handbag made out of austrich or crocodile leather require careful cleaning. 







unethical. Why do 100k watches exist in a world where millions can't afford to feed themselves.
We respect skilled artisans who spend their lives dedicated to a craft and are passionate about it. Like a watchmaker who spend 1 year working on one single watch. Yet when someone buys one for thousands of dollars, they can get critisized. 






Nobody needs a watch. Everyone knows this. A watch is not a necessity. Some choose to engrave a tattoo onto their skin, marking an experience they want to remember. Their body becomes a book, telling that person’s life story. It’s an interesting concept, and I respect it, but I would never do this, as I’m not confident that I will always want a permanent reminder of a temporary feeling or moment.



For some, watches are a competition. "Mine costs $5k". Don't compare yourself to others. Instead, have it be a playful competition with yourself. If you make a thousand thousand dollars (i.e. one million) one day, why not spend a handful of those thousands on something that will be with you forever.


It's about appreciating what you already have. 
Consumerism. Not chasing the next thing. Enjoy what you have. 

A watch is a representation of a life well-lived. an accessory that is also a companion. Carry with us for years. Things have no meaning. Their lifecycle lasts months, a couple of years. There is no pursuit in acquiring a normal object.

A mechanical watch relies on you. When you leave it on the counter, it will stop ticking.

A quartz watch is just like any other piece of consumer electronic. It lives independant of you. It's dependant on electricity.  everything around us is electronic.

Individual expression. what I collect is different from what you collect. I may have a yellow-faced watch because its eye catching, and you may have a white dialed watch because it fits with your outfits.

You can also just ignore all this and wear a watch because it elevates your 
look. 

I like what I like. You like what you like. But we are both right. There is almost no wrong answer with watches. As long as you enjoy what you wear, it doesn't matter what others think.

And I think, subconsciously, this is one of the reasons why I enjoy watches. ...



Romantic idea. they're handcrafted, more moving parts, no external power supply, just using gears and springs. hand-assembled in many instances. Its an art. Using technology to create something unnecessary. Doesnt advance science, and that's okay. Just like paintings. embodies the antithesis of what products in our modern world represent, which are chargeable and disposable objects. 

You're never right or wrong buying a watch.
It's hard to go wrong with buying a watch (you can go wrong matching it with the rest of your fit). As long as you enjoy it, it's all that matters.

There are watches for any single budget, and that's what I like about watches compared to cars.

However, we are not robots. We have many biases .. . And no one is perfect, and we have an idea of how the average person thinks. Sure, lots of people literally don't care about what you have on your wrist, but to most, a good looking watch, a nice outfit, .. . People will treat you differently. If the person you are talking to sees that you are financially successful, they are more likely to listen to what you have to say. Otherwise, you will have to do some talking to convince that you are worth listening to. Thousands of dollars wrapped around your wrist 

We are not robots. We subconsciously gain confidence. People will treat you differently.

To some, a watch is used to gain confidence. Or they have to spend some money to be motivated to make some more. Or they want other 

To me, a watch is an art piece. Nothing about a watch is necessary. It was useful 50 years ago, but not anymore. There is nothing rational about watches. 

I've always hated materialism and still do. If you get enjoyment from owning 20 pairs if anything, I dont get it. And watches have always been on the top of that list for me. But watches are actually cool

Companion item. Once you reach a certain milestone in life, you get another one that you like. And then in 50 years, you can look at your collection, and each watch will feel like an old friend.

Objects can take on emotional significance. Yes, it mostly is influenced by the branding of the company. so they induced this feeling that "if I become the CEO, then I should have a Rolex"

They keep on ticking. Everything is disposable, and even built with planned obsolescence 

